---
layout: post
title: "CAN bus"
categories:
---

Hacking on car stuff in the modern era nearly inevitably requires working with
CAN bus.  My CAN adventures so far have been fairly sporadic over the years, but
generally tedious, so I want to collect some notes here in the hopes that
someone finds them useful.  My current focus is on using my Linux laptop to
interact with CAN bus on a 2014 Nissan Leaf, and with a much smaller bus on my
workbench connecting a few bits I've scavenged off a crashed Leaf.  More on that
project in another post!

## Nissan Leaf CAN buses
The Leaf, at least the one I'm interested in, has a few different CAN buses,
three are available on the OBDII port (below the steering wheel) including what
are known as Car-CAN, EV-CAN, and AV-CAN.

Car-CAN ("CAN communication circuit" in the Service Manual) is the
general-purpose network, which most systems connect to.

EV-CAN ("EV system CAN circuit" in the Service Manual) connects the battery
controller, inverter, TCU (helpfully, in the Service Manual's Abbreviation list,
TCU is said to stand for "TCU") - basically the high power stuff that makes the
car go.  The EV-CAN connects to the Car-CAN via the VCM gateway.

AV-CAN apparently has to do with the audiovisual system.

## Host-CAN hardware
Most inexpensive computer-to-CAN adapters seem to be based on the
[ELM327](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ELM327), or likely a clone of it.  I have
tried using these connected to a smartphone or laptop via USB, WiFi, and
Bluetooth.  Other than one Bluetooth ELM327 adapter, connected to an Android
phone running LeafSpy, I have had very little success with the ELM327.  The
limited bandwidth of the ELM327 was ultimately what drove me to a different
adapter, it can't handle the traffic generated when the Leaf starts up.

I've wound up using a CANable Pro board, bought from AliExpress, stuck in the
enclosure from one of the disapointing ELM327 adapters.  This works with
SocketCAN out of the box, and is capable of much higher bandwidth than ELM327.

## Software
[SocketCAN](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SocketCAN) is a Linux technology which
basically can provide a socket interface to CAN bus.  This is a very helpful
layer of the stack, which allows a program to do stuff with CAN bus without
needing a driver for every CAN adapter.

## Further Reading
[Adequate CAN](https://gitlab.com/RancidBacon/adequate-can) - List of CAN stuff
by a likeminded Kiwi hacker.
